# Week 4: Relational Model and Queries

## Overview

The relational model provides a powerful set of techniques for identifying and addressing logical errors in data, both semantic and structural. Through the relational model and query languages, such as Datalog and SQL, widely-available database technologies can be used to identify and address logical errors in data that spans multiple columns or tables.  Regardless of whether the data will ultimately be stored in a relational database, these tools can be used to profile data; identify and apply integrity constraints; and repair errors.

This week we introduce (or, for many of you, revisit) some basic notions of the relational model. We will also take a brief look at various query languages for relational data. In subsequent weeks, we move from these theoretical underpinnings to practical hands-on exercises with relational technologies. You might want to review this week's material together with Week 5 and Week 6  -- in particular the Week 6 assignment (Assignment #3, SQLite) includes a walk-through tutorial that will help you understand relational concepts by working hands-on with a small database and queries.

## Weekly readings

[Ber11] Bertossi, L. (2011). 
[Introduction](https://doi-org.proxy2.library.illinois.edu/10.1007/978-3-031-01883-1_1)
. In: Database Repairing and Consistent Query Answering. Synthesis Lectures on Data Management. Springer.

[FG12] Fan, W., Geerts, F. (2012). 
[Data Quality: An Overview](https://link.springer.com/chapter/10.1007/978-3-031-01892-3_1)
. In: Foundations of Data Quality Management. Synthesis Lectures on Data Management. Springer.

Time

This module should take approximately 3.5 hours of dedicated time to complete, with its videos, readings, and quiz.

Lessons

The lessons for this module are listed below (with assignments in bold italics):

Activity
Estimated Time Required
Lesson 1 Lecture Videos
30 minutes
Readings
2 hour
Week 4 Quiz
1 hour
Goals and Objectives

Upon successful completion of this module, you will be able to:

Understand the role and position of relational technologies in data cleaning.
Recognize queries in different languages, in particular Datalog and SQL, and identify the common underlying logical core of relational queries.
Key Phrases/Concepts

Keep your eyes open for the following key terms or phrases as you interact with the lectures and complete the activities.  

Relational model
Relation schemas (table structures)
Relation instances (database instances)
Relational queries in predicate logic, Datalog, SQL, relational algebra
Guiding Questions

Develop your answers to the following guiding questions while watching lectures and working on assignments throughout the module.

What kinds of data quality issues can we tackle with relational database technologies? 
What are the elements of the relational model?
How can relational data be queried?
What are some pros and cons of common query languages for relational data?
Where do relational databases fit in the overall data cleaning workflow?